
'q remote' provides a web-based graphical user interface into q's pipeline 
management utilities.  With q remote, you use your web brower to configure
requests that are submitted to q installed on a job server.  

There are two modes in which q remote can be run, depending on whether you 
are in position to install a web server on your job server:

Daemon Mode:

In deamon mode, the q web server is installed on your local computer, for 
example on your desktop or laptop PC, and accesses your job server via ssh 
or Putty.  This requires that each end user install Perl and two Perl 
modules on their PC, as well as generate and install an RSA key for host 
authentication.  Any Windows, Mac or Linux machine can be used.  Once
installed, the q remote daemon can be made to point at any number of job 
servers by creating multiple configuration files.

See 'daemon.README' for more information on installing daemon mode.

Server Mode:

In server mode, the q web server is installed on the job server.  The job 
server must therefore run Apache httpd or some other http server.  Users
point their web browser to an address determined by the web server.  It
is up to the system adminstrator to ensure that users accessing the web
site are subjected to appropriate authentication and authorization, 
for example using LDAP, since once connected they will be able to run 
virtually any job on your job server!!  Jobs are submitted to the 
job scheduler under the user name assigned to the web server, NOT the 
name of the user who has logged in.

See 'server.README' for more information on installing server mode.

The interface provided by daemon and server modes are essentially identical
once loaded.  They differ in the way that they are set up and accessed.  In 
general, server mode will provide a faster interface, but it requires 
installation by a system administrator on any job server to be accessed, while
the daemon is under the user's control and is not specific to any one job
server.

